The science fiction radio show a commentary on science fiction today presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews and David Carson
On this program, we will be talking with author Larry Niven. Niven first
appeared in print in 1964, and by 1976, he had won the Hugo Award five times. He
has written a set of stories set in what he calls Known Space, which are a
future history or a series of stories with a common background. He has also
written several novels and stories not related to the Known Space series. Aside
from science fiction, Niven has written a fantasy called The Magic Goes Away and
co-authored with Jerry Pournelle a science fiction rendering of Dante's Inferno
entitled, appropriately enough, Inferno. Other collaborations with Jerry Pournelle
include A Mote in God's Eye and the bestseller Lucifer's Hammer. For my first
question to you, Mr. Niven, I'd like to ask if you classify yourself as a hard
science fiction writer in the tradition of Hal Clement? If you've got to
classify me, that's where I sit, yes. would I suppose all writers resist
classification as best they can I do other things too fantasy considerable
fantasy a great deal more hard science fiction not much in the way of soft
science fiction articles speeches I'm the guy who did a study of the medical
problems of breeding Kryptonians, called Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex. And I
just published the only venture I've ever made into economics, a method which
would also solve the problem of nuclear waste disposal. The idea is to turn the
nuclear waste into coins. A healthy economy is one in which the money circulates
fast. You mentioned that you had not written much in the area of soft science
fiction. Do you think the New Wave is past, that fans and writers are turning
back to strongly science-oriented stories? Yes, I do. However, the New Wave was
very good to me. When I was first getting started, I was the only new hard
science fiction writer. The New Wave is a very persuasive thing and very easy to
use to justify bad stories. I think that's what killed it. Not that increased
characterization and experiments with typography and story format are a bad
thing in themselves, but it's so easy to use New Wave to justify a bad story. It
was bound to collapse. How did you begin writing science fiction? Were you
always a science fiction reader, a fan? Yes. And presently I found I was making
up... I was daydreaming stories that seemed worth writing. Did you tell the
stories to others before you gained enough confidence to write them down? Yes,
I've been a storyteller all my life. You have a large and involved fan
following. Do you ever write specifically for them or do you write only how you
want to? I mostly write for myself for an imaginary reader who resembles me a
great deal. Only he needs things explained to him. Beyond that, I sell it where
I can and pick up readers where I can. Let's turn to your known space series for
a moment. How did you get started writing a future history? Well, there had been
future histories around. Poole Anderson and Robert Heinlein. And I tell you, I
guess we each evolve the idea somewhat independently, and the idea is that if
you carved out a consistent workable future, it seems a shame to waste it on one
story. You put in the background because you want the background
of a story to seem bigger than it is, so there are things that are simply
unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why, you go with it. And if
you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story and
allows you to elaborate on that background, sometimes you fall in love with the
background, and presently you've got a bunch of stories that link. In the
afterword of Ringworld Engineers you said that your known space series was
completed. Is that still true, and if so, why? I've given up saying that the
that the Known Space series is dead there's just no point in it I've written
five books worth of Known Space stories since I said that and besides that I
have no doubt that I'll come up with stories set in Gildly Arms time I like
writing science fiction detective stories it's just hard work I do not have a
detective story in my head It'll have to emerge. But that's the beginning of
known space, and I'll continue to work with it where it looks like fun. You
have, as you mentioned, written science fiction detective stories, and you've
experimented with humor in science fiction. Is there any subject area that you
think can't be handled well in the science fiction genre? No, I can't think of
any. I guess I go along with the idea that there are these interlocked circles
to represent various areas of fiction, and they all swim in the sea of fantasy.
Science fiction probably includes the entire portion of fantasy that is
possible. And mainstream would be somewhere in there. Nurse novels would be
somewhere in that. There would be no subject you could treat in English that
couldn't be treated in a science fiction format except fantasy and that would be
treated in a fantasy format. Probably your best known work in the known space
series is Ringworld. Can you tell us how that concept came about? Oh, I ran
across the concept Dyson sphere. Dyson the mathematician came up with the
concept Dyson shell, and he was misunderstood to some extent, so presently I ran
across an article about Dyson spheres. Picture that as a golf ball 93 million
miles in radius with a sun at the center and gravity generators all around the
outside so you would live on the inside, terraform it with oceans and soil and
air. I ran across that and I didn't like it. I thought it could be improved, and
I wound up with the ringworld. Freeman Dyson, in commenting on your adaptation
of his idea, said that a great number of small ringworlds would be better than
the large one that you had. I believe I gave an acceptable answer to that, in
the ring world engineers but in general he'd be right it's just that the ring
world engineers in particular are people who like defendable weapons of huge
size many of your fans pointed out a number of mistakes and made many
elaborations on the concept of the ring world can you tell us what some of them
were and how they were corrected or worked into the sequel For instance, I
suspected the ring world was unstable, and I suspected you'd need attitude jets.
I was sure that the ring world was spinning fast enough to permit bussard ram
jets to be used as attitude jets, which means you don't have a fuel problem at
all. You're burning the solar wind. But rapidly, some MIT people demonstrated
that the ring world was unstable, and they were chanting it in the halls at the
Next Worldcon. the ring world is unstable the ring world is unstable ah it still
took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the
instability and they are horrifying the ring world a major solar flare would
have the ring world grinding against its sun in five years
well i worked in the plot that was one uh elaboration or error. Another just
can't be correct. It seems that there's too much twilight with the shadow
squares set up the way I have them set up. You get too much of neither day nor
night but twilight, half the sun showing, part of the sun showing. The shadow
squares ought to be set up with about five big shadow squares moving in a
retrograde world. That way you get day and night setting Much faster When it
sets Terminator line moves like a bat out of hell It's still a little fuzzy But
it doesn't matter Third point Somebody pointed out That the tensile strength
Necessary To hold the ring rule together Is on the order of the tensile strength
Of an atomic nucleus It's the super strong force Okay, I can live with that. I
can postulate that. I knew scales would have to be stronger than any normal
material already. already. A high
school class in Florida got to work on the ringworld, and their conclusion was
that the ringworld's worst problem is that all the topsoil would wind up in the
oceans in about 3,000 years. There are no earthquakes on the ringworld, no
mountain-building
Okay, that's a tough one, I set up a spill pipe system that runs the Top, runs
the sea bottom muck from the sea bottom under the ring world and up over the
edge of the ring rim wall that even allows you some, some minds accumulation of
useful metals, what else? Well, I'm checking in my head. I find Frank Gasparak's
suggestion that a machine-building culture on the ring world, which reached our
level, wouldn't have any petroleum products to use. They would wind up using
alcohol, where we use gasoline. And fine, I can live with that. As a matter of
fact, the sludge from making alcohol for automobiles, the sludge can be used to
make plastics, maybe. Plastic-like substances, maybe. The chemicals are just as
elaborate as the residues from petroleum. What else? Still checking in my head.
I pick up on other things I can't use, such as Dan Alderson's solar system which
involves four ring worlds. He's got three ring worlds about the size of mine,
rotating orthogonally on frictionless bearings. And the fourth ring world is
about the size of the orbit of Jupiter and inhabited by Mesklinites. Mesklinites
derived from a novel by Hal Clement, Mission of Gravity. and mesklinites
require cold temperatures about those of the orbit of Jupiter, as opposed to
Jupiter, which has an internal heat source. Cold temperatures and heavy gravity.
So his fourth ring world is the size of the orbit of Jupiter and spinning like a
bat out of hell. I had it figured out that if they spun that ring world any
faster, it would get nearer the speed of light and contract, Dan says I've
misunderstood relativity, it would not contract. Okay, I still haven't figured
out why not. Well, you obviously enjoy playing the game, as how Clement calls
it, between your own scientific knowledge and that of your readers and peers.
Absolutely. I incorporated everything that sounded good that I could use in
elaborating the design of the ringworld. What do you think about the current
ideas for space habitats that are proposed by Gerard Evel and others. I think
they are grandiose, and I certainly wouldn't stop them. But the space program
seems to have fallen flat on its face at this point. We will have trouble
reaching the moon again. Getting back to the moon is as big a problem as we can
face. I resent having to say that, but I believe it's true. Let's turn for a
moment to another of your novels, One written with Jerry Pournelle. The Mote in
God's Eye. How do you go about constructing an alien like the Moties? Were you
influenced by anyone in that area? The Moties was, no. Not in that case. In that
case, I had the idea that I was following a progression with a protozoan, with
an amoeba. You get radio symmetry inside and out. Move up a goodly distance and
you find starfishes with radial symmetry on the outside and bilateral symmetry
on the inside. Move up a little further, you find flatworms and worms of all
states. At the level of bilateral symmetry inside and out, go as far as a human,
you find bilateral symmetry on the outside and no symmetry, well, half
symmetrical on the inside. The lungs look symmetrical, the kidneys look
symmetrical. The intestines look like somebody dropped a plate of spaghetti. I
tried to move on to the next step
Bilaterally unsymmetrical on my outside And I got the original Modi, which was
the engineered for us But I always design aliens For themselves. I almost never
design an alien to match a story the story the story, some story will eventually
include the aliens. The alien stands for himself. I think that one of the
outstanding aspects of the Moties was their non-use of standardized machines.
They would create whatever replacement parts that they needed on the spot. Do
you recall what caused you to think along those lines for your alien society? I
was just playing along. I was just playing with ideas at that point. and that
one seemed like a fun one. It also seemed likely enough, if you've got a critter
with not much intelligence except in the direction of tool making and tool
altering, then why not? The thing has to keep testing its ability, or it will
lose it. It might as well be designing something every time it needs a specific
machine. a master can always stop it and have it producing as if by assembly
line if a master needs a lot of somethings fast. In Ring World, you developed
something called the Teela Brown gene, humans bred to be lucky. Was that just a
story gimmick, or were you extrapolating on the evolution of humanity? Oh,
partly that, and partly you've got to remember the time I was writing. I was
damn sick and tired of psychic powers showing up in stories. I did not believe
in psychic powers at that time. I've been told they look pretty good now. But at
the time, I conceived the T. Labrum gene as being the ultimate psychic power,
which you may interpret either as luck or as author control.
and in that sense it was something of a put-on except that i can believe almost
anything while i'm writing the story and i am able to extrapolate so if tila
brown is lucky certain things emerge and if she's just a statistical fluke then
then something else emerges and that's that People will interpret anything that
happens to them as lucky. Defending their preconception. What do you consider to
be your best work or your favorite work? No, I couldn't tell you that. There is
no way I can name a favorite work. The whole, my career is a progression for one
thing. Take any novel or any important short story even out of that progression
and it wanders away in a different direction. So I don't think I have a favorite
story, but I suppose I can name In Constant Moon, which is virtually the only
strictly love story I've ever done. And I suppose I could name Lucifer's Hammer,
which made me the most money. Though Mote in God's Eye may beat that. I suppose
I could name, oh, Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex, which has gotten me the most
laughs, I suppose. Everybody seems to have read it, and those who haven't have
heard about it a cocktail party.
Or what? Jerry Pornell and I just recently wrote the last ten minutes for a
movie that had a good 90 minutes followed by a bad last 10 minutes. And the last
I've heard is they're not going to make the movie, which is a dirty shame. That
is, they're not going to make the last 10 minutes an hour away. They're going to
fiddle with what they've got. And that's a really dirty shame. What they've got
is garbage. I really hope they use that last 10 minutes. And if they do, I will
get considerable enjoyment out of that. And that'll be my favorite. You name it.
You mentioned your collaboration with Jerry Parnell. Which do you prefer,
writing alone or with another author? I prefer variety. I even prefer variety
and my collaborators. I just finished a novel with a Stephen Barnes, and we're
starting another, a short one. And Jerry and I are starting another, almost
instantly, novel about… Well, we've designed an alien that could invade the
earth and also would want to. It's tough to get an alien whom you could believe
would want to invade the earth from another star, considering the distances
involved and the energies involved and the penalties for failure and the lack
of, uh, the unlikelihood that it will do your home planet any good if you
conquer something that is six light years away. Anyway, we've designed one, and
we will be writing a novel about that. When writing in collaboration, is it
difficult to decide who writes what? Hard sometimes, but it always resolves. The
question is, Who is most qualified to write a given scene that we have both
decided needs writing? Before we start, we have the novel all laid out. We know
what's going in virtually everywhere. And if we don't, it feels like we do. And
if we find out we don't, we elaborate as we get to that section. Okay, the next
question is, Who is qualified to write a given scene? Sometimes it's obvious. If
we're dealing with a madman, he's mine. If we're dealing with military
operations, it's Jerry's. Aliens are generally mine. Politics is generally
Jerry's. Knowledge of history is generally Jerry's. And a real evil son of a
bitch, Jerry usually creates him, and I usually run with him afterward. because
Jerry has a lot of textbooks on psychology and a PhD in psychology for that
matter sorry doctorate in psychology and when he's created a really evil son of
a bitch he just hates him too much to work with him I can usually do something
Horace Barry went that way and the rapist in Lucifer's Hammer and a couple of
the characters in Inferno I understand that both you and Mr. Pournelle use
computer word processors. How does that aid in your writing? It makes first
draft a little faster. But it makes corrections enormously faster. You get a
more polished novel when I'm using a word processor. Polishing is just like
thinking into the machine almost.
The word processor behaves like a magic typewriter. it does everything you would
want a typewriter to do, only it can. It can't erase whole blocks of print at a
time, and then straighten up the page so it looks like you never made any
corrections. But a word processor can do just that, and move blocks up and down
the page. Up and down the manuscript. What do you think, Mr. Niven, is the
future of science fiction? Has fantasy begun taking over, or is there a lot more
hard science fiction to come? Hard to say. For one thing, writers in general
don't take orders worth a damn. The science-fiction field is galloping off in
all directions just as it always has, and the reader will make the final
decision in most cases. What will be successful will depend on who buys what
book. That's always been true. I understand that some of your works were
involved several years ago with the animated Star Trek series. How did that come
about? Oh, it went like this. They were going to start a Star Trek cartoon, and
the lady who was story editor got me involved. I tried to give them a story that
involved a mini black hole and an outsider ship. I had the idea that Star Trek
had been using men in rubber suits for so long that they wouldn't realize how
much more freedom they had with the animated version. That turns out not to be
the case. They had some very good aliens in there. But that story turned out to
be a little over the heads of their intended audience. so I want it did
incidentally wind up as the first version of the last part of a story called The
Borderlands of Soul so I eventually wound up meeting Gene Roddenberry and he
wound up suggesting why don't I take a story called The Soft Weapon and turn it
into a Star Trek version and I did that and called it The Slaver Weapon and fine
they eventually made a cartoon out of it they also sold the right to turn that
cartoon script into a story. They sold that to Ballantine. I got mildly upset
the president of the SFWA who was Jerry Pournelle at the time got seriously upset
and started making as many ways as he could and what eventually happened was
that they sent me a dollar for a check for two dollars and something something
cents somewhere between two and three dollars and jerry i don't know where the
negotiations went but jerry wound up saying okay that defends the principle of
the thing uh we'll ask for more next time and that's that for some years by by
then i had written to Ballantine and gotten a letter from Betty Ballantine
saying, hey, we won't ever use it. We promise. We see you're upset. We promise
we won't ever do anything with this. A little later, the Ballantines got out of
the Ballantine Books business and into the business of printing illustrated
stuff, and Judy-Lynn Del Rey wound up in charge, and presently, presently, I'm
being offered $2,000 as advisor to Alan Dean Foster who will turn my script into
a novel. And I said fine when what I really meant was acceptable. A few months
later I've got a letter from Judy-Lynn dropping the price to $500 and I pulled my
top. I said A. I won't collaborate with with you or Alan on anything of the
kind. And B. You may not use anything from known space except what's in the
script. and that is the way it happens. Are there any plans for motion picture
or television adaptations of any of your works in the near future? Yes, there
are. I just don't know how far they are going to go but there is a group that
owns an option on Death by Ecstasy and a guy who owns an option on The Mode in
God's Eye and, let's see, I've got a friend trying to get a public broadcasting
system to make a TV version of Incontent Women, which would be nice, all of
which would be nice. Are there any contemporary writers that you particularly
enjoy reading? Yes, a great many. Ursula Le Guin, John Varley, Poul Anderson,
Jerry Pournelle.
How far do we go with this? I like the old ones, and I like the new ones. I like
about half of uh, Harlan Ellison's stories, which is a better record than... many
writers have. I like a few of Phil Dick's stories, and I will probably buy the
last of the Dorsai books by Gordon Dickson. In fact, it's damn certain I will read
it I'll buy it if it doesn't come free I'm swamped in free books
I'm a Piers Anthony fan I don't know how numerous we Piers Anthony fans are I
like the puzzles in his books And his books are always jammed with puzzles And
new ways of thinking And so forth One last question I don't suppose those
Pearson Puppeteers ever stuck you the formula for the General Products whole,
did they? No, I don't have the formula in the General Products whole. But I have
reason to suspect that there are puppeteers on Earth. Look at their
characteristics. Forget the shape. They must be masters of biology to hide that
peculiar three-legged, two-headed shape. But consider their characteristics.
They are cowards. that is, they want everything utterly safe no corners on
anything, everything is soft surfaces around the puppeteer world they don't even
keep their world near a sun regarding it as a runaway fusion reactor which of
course it is so, desperate regard for safety plus an urge to meddle in the
lifestyle of other species driving urge to middle with practically no restraints
attached. What does that remind you of? It seems nearly certain to me that Ralph
Nader is a Pearson's book in here.
This is David Crews. I'm David Carson. This has been the Science Fiction Radio
Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association in
conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.